



MLS                                                           Y. N. Here
Internet-Draft                                    Your Organization Here
Intended status: Informational                           5 November 2025
Expires: 9 May 2026


               Distributed and Decentralized Uses of MLS
                  draft-todo-yourname-protocol-latest

Abstract

   The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol provides continuous key
   agreement, and offers additional benefits in multi-device, a.k.a.
   group use cases.  MLS is reliant on a Delivery Service (DS) for
   message ordering.  In highly centralized uses, where the DS is a
   single server, configuration is straightforward.  However, MLS also
   lends itself to use cases that are decentralized (e.g., federated
   networks) and even distributed (e.g., mesh networks).  This
   informational document lays out uses of MLS and its variants and
   extensions across various topologies and provides guidance on
   selection among alternatives under both functionality and security
   considerations.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://example.com/LATEST.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-todo-yourname-
   protocol/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the WG Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:WG@example.com), which is archived at
   https://example.com/WG.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/USER/REPO.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 May 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Definitions
   3.  Trade-off Considerations
     3.1.  MLS
       3.1.1.  Overhead
       3.1.2.  DS
       3.1.3.  Resiliency
     3.2.  DeMLS (Konrad)
       3.2.1.  Overhead
       3.2.2.  DS
       3.2.3.  Resiliency
     3.3.  DiMLS (Mark)
       3.3.1.  Overhead
       3.3.2.  DS
       3.3.3.  Resiliency
   4.  Use Cases
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   TODO Introduction

2.  Definitions

   Members: Protocol participants.  Centralized: A centralized network
   has a single server or entity perform the responsibilites of a DS.
   An entity may also be a member.  Decentralized: A decentralized
   network relies on federation of servers or select entites performing
   the responsibilities of a DS.  For example, assigned members may
   coordinate DS responsibilites among themselves.
   Distributed: A distributed network relies on many entities performing
   the responsibilities of a DS.  This may include cases of many members
   or even all members participating in DS responsibilities, such as in
   mesh networks.

3.  Trade-off Considerations

3.1.  MLS

   The MLS protocol is defined in [RFC9420].

3.1.1.  Overhead

   MLS offers logarthimic overhead for groups.

   Additional overhead from the DS must also be accounted for.

3.1.2.  DS

   The centralized case is straightforward in MLS.  For decentralized
   use cases and distributed use cases, care must be taken to identify a
   suitable DS to ensure that there is group consensus on commit
   ordering.  As a use case increases in complexity to the decentralized
   setting and thence to the distributed setting, DS design decisions
   have increasing implications on overhead and potentially also
   security.

   In a decentralized setting, one example solution is to assign one
   server (among a set of federated servers) as the decision holder for
   such ordering, thereby creating a pseudo-centralized environment out
   of a decentralized environment.  In a distributed use case, the
   challenge increases.  Similar temporary role assignment to members,
   where in one is dedicated as a the "lead" entity for deciding commit
   ordering may be possible in well-connected use cases.

   Another approach is hierarchical ordering of commits, e.g., where
   each member is assigned an order in which to commit a PCS update.
   This eases the complexity of the DS, but can create considerations on
   length of PCS windows, especially if a member is offline.  Handling
   of Adds and Removes must also be accounted for.

   Yet a further approach is that of using a consensus algorithm to
   reach agreement on commit ordering.  This offloads overhead to the DS
   as such consensus algorithms can vary wideline in incurred overhead
   and delay for processing, especially if a member is unreachable.

   Thus maintaining consensus on commit ordering tends to incur
   increasing DS overhead has network topology spreads.

3.1.3.  Resiliency

   MLS is heavily dependent on commit ordering being processed in the
   correct sequence.  Out-of-order commits can lead to forks in the
   group state.

3.2.  DeMLS (Konrad)

   DeMLS is defined in....

3.2.1.  Overhead

   DeMLS maintains the logarithmic overhead of updates in MLS.  DS
   overhead must also be accounted for as in MLS for various topologies,
   but imposes slightly less ordering strictness than in MLS, as the
   mechanism enables out-of-order commit processing.  As a trade-off,
   DeMLS requires more storage on the end device.  The additional
   storage requirements are generally correlated to ordering strictness;
   the less delay or out of order commits occur, the less state and
   storage expansion is required.

3.2.2.  DS

3.2.3.  Resiliency

   DeMLS provides fork resilience and a cost to memory.

3.3.  DiMLS (Mark)

   DiMLS is defined in....

3.3.1.  Overhead

   DiMLS overhead has linear update overhead.  However, it is not
   dependent on the DS for commit ordering, reducing the DS overhead
   requirements.  For example, a consensus on commit ordering is not
   required for the DS unlike in MLS.  Thus the trade-off in DiMLS is
   among overhead incurred by the security protocol itself and its
   architectural requirements in DS overhead.

3.3.2.  DS

   In DiMLS there are fewer requirements on the DS for exact ordering.
   Messages must get to the respective destinations but in-order
   delivery is not expected for security purposes of maintaining a
   consistent state.

3.3.3.  Resiliency

   DeMLS is highly resilient to out-of-order commits and, in the case of
   honest members, forking of the group state is not possible.  This is
   because each member has full control of commit ordering as it relates
   to the keying state protecting the messages that member sends.

4.  Use Cases

   The basic MLS protocol functions well in environments where reliable
   in-order delivery can be assured.  That includes both centralized
   environment as well as those in decentralized and distributed uses
   where the DS overhead for e.g., consensus is deemed supportable.

   For cases of minor network topology spread, e.g., decentralized uses
   such as federated servers, DeMLS can provide improvements to fork
   resiliency at minor costs to storage.

   For distributed environments where significant changes in network
   topologies are expected, e.g., mesh networks, or where memory storage
   is a consideration, DiMLS offers advantages.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document covers security considerations for various applications
   of other documents to and including MLS.  This document is not an
   exhaustive security reference for use of MLS in decentralized or
   distributed environments, but focuses on the issue of state forking
   in such use cases.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Your Name Here
   Your Organization Here
   Email: your.email@example.com
