



Messaging Layer Security                                          M. Xue
Internet-Draft                                        Germ Network, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                   B. Hale
Expires: 11 February 2027                      Naval Postgraduate School
                                                              K. Kohbrok
                                                             Phoenix R&D
                                                          10 August 2026


               Distributed and Decentralized Uses of MLS
                   draft-xue-mls-decentralized-latest

Abstract

   The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol provides continuous key
   agreement and offers additional benefits in multi-device group use
   cases.  MLS relies on a Delivery Service (DS) for message ordering.
   In highly centralized uses, where the DS is a single server,
   configuration is straightforward.  However, MLS also lends itself to
   use cases that are decentralized (e.g., federated networks) and even
   distributed (e.g., mesh networks).  This informational document lays
   out uses of MLS and its variants and extensions across various
   topologies and provides guidance on selection among alternatives
   under both functionality and security considerations.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at https://germ-
   mark.github.io/mls-informational-decentralized-applications/draft-
   xue-mls-decentralized.html.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-xue-mls-
   decentralized/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Messaging Layer
   Security Working Group mailing list (mailto:mls@ietf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mls/.  Subscribe
   at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/mls/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/germ-mark/mls-informational-decentralized-
   applications.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 11 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Definitions
   3.  Trade-off Considerations
     3.1.  MLS
       3.1.1.  Overhead
       3.1.2.  Delivery Service
       3.1.3.  Resiliency
     3.2.  DeMLS
       3.2.1.  Overhead
       3.2.2.  Delivery Service
       3.2.3.  Resiliency
     3.3.  DiMLS
       3.3.1.  Overhead
       3.3.2.  Delivery Service
       3.3.3.  Resiliency
   4.  Use Cases
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol is typically used in
   scenarios where a Delivery Service (DS) layer ensures that clients
   eventually agree on the order in which commits are applied.  However,
   MLS is increasingly used in decentralized and distributed
   environments such as mesh networks.  In such cases, implementation of
   an adequate DS that ensures agreement on commit ordering can be
   difficult, for example, because it incurs a significant overhead.
   This has driven consideration of how to account for potential forking
   of the group state [I-D.kohbrok-mls-dmls] for reordered commit
   messages or avoid the risk of out-of-order commits altogether
   [I-D.xue-distributed-mls].  This informational document provides an
   outline of uses of MLS and its extensions across various network
   topology considerations, with specific considerations to network
   overhead, storage, and security from state forking.

2.  Definitions

   Members:  Protocol participants.

   Centralized:  A centralized network has a single server or entity
      perform the responsibilities of a DS.  An entity may also be a
      member.

   Decentralized:  A decentralized network relies on federation of
      servers or select entities performing the responsibilities of a
      DS.  For example, assigned members may coordinate DS
      responsibilities among themselves.

   Distributed:  A distributed network relies on many entities
      performing the responsibilities of a DS.  This may include cases
      of many members or even all members participating in DS
      responsibilities, such as in mesh networks.

3.  Trade-off Considerations

3.1.  MLS

   The MLS protocol is defined in [RFC9420].

3.1.1.  Overhead

   MLS offers logarithmic overhead for groups.

   Additional overhead from the DS must also be accounted for.

3.1.2.  Delivery Service

   The centralized case is straightforward in MLS.  For decentralized
   use cases and distributed use cases, care must be taken to identify a
   suitable DS to ensure that there is group consensus on commit
   ordering.  As a use case increases in complexity from the
   decentralized setting to the distributed setting, DS design decisions
   have increasing implications on overhead and potentially also
   security.

   In a decentralized setting, one example solution is to assign one
   server (among a set of federated servers) as the decision holder for
   such ordering, thereby creating a pseudo-centralized environment out
   of a decentralized environment.  In a distributed use case, the
   challenge increases.  Similar temporary role assignment to members,
   where one member is dedicated as the "lead" entity for deciding
   commit ordering may be possible in well-connected use cases.

   Another approach is hierarchical ordering of commits, e.g., where
   each member is assigned an order in which to commit a PCS update.
   This eases the complexity of the DS, but can create considerations on
   length of PCS windows, especially if a member is offline.  Handling
   of Adds and Removes must also be accounted for.

   Yet a further approach is that of using a consensus algorithm to
   reach agreement on commit ordering.  This offloads overhead to the DS
   as such consensus algorithms can vary widely in overhead and delay
   incurred for processing, especially if a member is unreachable.

   Thus maintaining consensus on commit ordering tends to incur
   increasing DS overhead as network topologies become more distributed.

3.1.3.  Resiliency

   MLS is heavily dependent on commit ordering being processed in the
   correct sequence.  Out-of-order commits can lead to forks in the
   group state.

3.2.  DeMLS

   In MLS, retention of a group state after applying a commit is
   strongly discouraged, because it compromises the protocol's forward
   secrecy.  As such, clients cannot process out-of-order commits,
   because the group state is deleted after the first commit is applied.

   DeMLS [I-D.kohbrok-mls-dmls] is a variant of MLS that achieves fork
   resilience as introduced by Alwen et al.  [FRCGKA], which
   significantly improves forward secrecy when retaining a group state
   after applying a commit.

   The main difference between MLS and DeMLS is how the init_secret is
   derived in the key schedule.  Instead of a regular KDF, DeMLS uses a
   puncturable pseudorandom function (PPRF), which prevents the client
   from deriving the same init_secret twice, thus achieving forward
   secrecy for each specific commit.

3.2.1.  Overhead

   As DeMLS is largely the same as MLS, it retains its performance
   characteristics with the exception of local storage.  Here, the PPRF
   used by DeMLS incurs a local storage overhead on the order of 10 kB
   (depending slightly on the PPRF implementation) per commit processed
   (if the old group state is retained).  The only other place where
   DeMLS differs from MLS is that an extra 32-byte epoch identifier
   needs to be attached to every message to identify the exact group
   state required to process the message.

3.2.2.  Delivery Service

   Its fork resilience makes DeMLS generally suitable for use in
   environments where the DS cannot prevent the occurrence of out-of-
   order commits.

   However, due to the overhead associated with commit processing, DeMLS
   benefits from a DS that can inform clients when out-of-order
   processing may be necessary.

   For example, in federated environments, individual servers can detect
   when they lose connectivity with other parts of the network and
   inform clients that they may need to process multiple commits for the
   current epoch.  Similarly, the server can inform its clients when a
   given netsplit is over and old group states can be deleted.

3.2.3.  Resiliency

   DeMLS makes it safer to maintain multiple forks of a group at the
   added cost of storage, as well as a slight complexity increase in
   MLS's key schedule.  This makes the use of MLS viable in environments
   where forks may occur due to out-of-order commits.

3.3.  DiMLS

   DiMLS is defined in [I-D.xue-distributed-mls].

   DiMLS accomodates concurrent actions by

   *  defining a subset of group operations that are commutative and can
      be applied out of order

   *  using MLS groups as a primitive to represent each local snapshot
      of the total group state

   *  advancing group state by distributing commits to the sender's
      local state

   *  maintaining causal dependency across MLS groups by exporting
      shared secrets and DiMLS accommodates concurrent actions by:

   *  defining a subset of group operations that are commutative and can
      be applied out of order

   *  using MLS groups as a primitive to represent each local snapshot
      of the total group state

   *  advancing group state by distributing commits to the sender's
      local state

   *  maintaining causal dependency across MLS groups by exporting
      shared secrets and importing them as PSK's.

3.3.1.  Overhead

   DiMLS overhead has linear update overhead.  However, it is not
   dependent on the DS for commit ordering, reducing the DS overhead
   requirements.  For example, a consensus on commit ordering is not
   required for the DS unlike in MLS.  Thus the trade-off in DiMLS is
   among overhead incurred by the security protocol itself and its
   architectural requirements in DS overhead.

3.3.2.  Delivery Service

   In DiMLS there are fewer requirements on the DS for exact ordering.
   Members must eventually receive each commit from each other member,
   but delivery does not need to be ordered for members to maintain
   consistent state.

3.3.3.  Resiliency

   DeMLS is highly resilient to out-of-order commits and, in the case of
   honest members, forking of the group state is not possible.  This is
   because each member has full control of commit ordering as it relates
   to the keying state protecting the messages that member sends.

4.  Use Cases

   The basic MLS protocol functions well in environments where reliable
   in-order delivery can be assured.  That includes both centralized
   environment as well as those in decentralized and distributed uses
   where the DS overhead for e.g., consensus is deemed supportable.

   For cases of minor network topology spread, e.g., decentralized uses
   such as federated servers, DeMLS can provide improvements to fork
   resiliency at minor costs to storage.

   For distributed environments where significant changes in network
   topologies are expected, e.g., mesh networks, or where memory storage
   is a consideration, DiMLS offers advantages.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document covers security considerations for various applications
   of other documents to and including MLS.  This document is not an
   exhaustive security reference for use of MLS in decentralized or
   distributed environments, but focuses on the issue of state forking
   in such use cases.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC9420]  Barnes, R., Beurdouche, B., Robert, R., Millican, J.,
              Omara, E., and K. Cohn-Gordon, "The Messaging Layer
              Security (MLS) Protocol", RFC 9420, DOI 10.17487/RFC9420,
              July 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9420>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [FRCGKA]   Alwen, J., Mularczyk, M., and Y. Tselekounis, "Fork-
              Resilient Continuous Group Key Agreement", 22 February
              2024, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/394.pdf>.

   [I-D.kohbrok-mls-dmls]
              Kohbrok, K., "Decentralized Messaging Layer Security",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-kohbrok-mls-dmls-
              03, 20 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-kohbrok-mls-
              dmls-03>.

   [I-D.xue-distributed-mls]
              Xue, M., Lukefahr, J. W., and B. Hale, "Distributed MLS",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-xue-distributed-
              mls-02, 20 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-xue-
              distributed-mls-02>.

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Xue
   Germ Network, Inc.
   Email: mark@germ.network


   Britta Hale
   Naval Postgraduate School
   Email: britta.hale@nps.edu


   Konrad Kohbrok
   Phoenix R&D
   Email: konrad@ratchet.ing
